So welcome to part two of our probability
review. This video assumes you've already
watched part one or at least are familiar
with concepts covered in part one. Namely
sample spaces, events, random variables,
expectation and linearity of expectation.
In this part of the review we're going to
be covering just two topics. Conditional
probability and the closer related topic
of independence. Both between events and
between random variables. I want to remind
you that this is by no means the only
source you can or should use to learn this
material. A couple of other sources free
that I recommend are lecture notes that
you can find online by Eric. And also
there's a wiki book on discrete
probability. So, conditional probability,
I hope you're not surprised to hear, is
fundamental to understanding randomized
algorithms. That said, in the five weeks
we have here, we'll probably only use it
once. And that's in analyzing the
correctness of the random contraction
algorithm for computing the minimum cut of
an undirected graph. So, just to make sure
we're all on the same page, here's some
stuff you should have learned, from part
one of the probability review. You should
know what a sample space is. This
represents all of the different outcomes
of the random coin flips, all of the
different things that could happen. Often
in randomized algorithm analysis, this is
just all of the possible random choices
that the algorithm might make. Each
outcome has some known probability
[inaudible]. By and, of course, the sum of
the probabilities equal one and remember
that event is nothing more than a subset
of omega. Omega is everything that could
possibly happen. S is some subset of
things that might happen and, of course,
the probability of event is just the
probability of, of all the outcomes that
the event contains. So, let's talk about
conditional probability. So one discusses
the conditional probability of one event
given a second event. So, let X and Y
denote two events, subsets of the same
sample space. You might want to think
about these two events X and Y in terms of
an event diagram. So we could draw a box,
representing everything that could
conceivably happen. So that's Omega. Then
we can draw a blob corresponding to the
event X. So that's some stuff. Might or
might not happen, who knows. And then the
other event Y is some other stuff which
might or might not happen. And in general
these two events could be disjoint, that
is they could have no intersection. Or
they might have a non-trivial
intersection. X intersect Y. Similarly
they need not cover omega. It's possible
that nothing X nor Y happens. So what's
we're looking to define is the probability
of the event X given the even Y. So we
write probability of X bar Y, phrased X
given Y. And the definition is, I think,
pretty intuitive. So given Y means we
assume that something in Y happened.
Originally anything in omega could have
happened. We didn't know what. Now we're
being told that whatever happened that
lies somewhere in Y. So we zoom in on the
part of the picture that, in which
contains Y. So that's gonna be our
denominator. So, our new world is the
stuff in Y. That's what we know happened.
And now we're interested in the proportion
of Y that is filled up with X. So, we're
interested in what fraction of Y's area is
occupied by stuff in X. So X intersect Y,
divided by the probability of Y. That is
by definition the conditional probability
of X given Y. Let?s turn to a quiz, using
our familiar example of rolling two dice.
To make sure that the definition of
conditional probability makes sense to
you. Okay, so the correct answer to this
quiz is the third answer. So let's see why
that is. So what are the two events that
we care about? We want to know the
probability of X given Y, where X is the
event that at least one die is a one. And
Y is the events that the sum of the two
dice is seven. Now, the easiest way to
explain this is let's zoom in, let's drill
down on the Y. Let's figure out exactly
which outcomes Y comprises. So the sum of
the two dice, being seven, we saw in the
first part of the review, there's exactly
six outcomes which give rise to the sum
seven, namely the ordered pairs one, six.
Two five, three four, four three, five
two, and six one. Now, remember that the
probability. Of x given y is by definition
the probability of x intersect y divided
by the probability of y. Now, what you
notice from this formula is we actually
don't care about the probability of x per
se or even about the event x per se, just
about x intersect y. So, let's just fig,
so, now we know why there has to be six
outcomes. Which of those also belong to x?
Well, x is those where at least one die is
one. So, x intersect y is just going to be
the one, six and the six, one. Now the
probability of each of the 36 possible
outcomes is equally likely. So each one is
one over 36. So since X intersects Y, has
only two outcomes. That's gonna give us
two over 36 in the numerator. Since Y has
six outcomes, that gives us a six over 36
in the denominator. When you cancel
everything out, you're left with a one
third. So just applying the definition of
conditional probability to the correct
definition of the two relevant events, we
find that indeed a third of the time is
when you have a one condition on the sum
of the two being seven. Let's move on to
the independence of two events. So. Again
we consider two events, x and y. By
definition, the events are dependent if
and only if the following equation holds.
The probability that both of them happen.
That is the probability of x intersect y
is exactly equal to the probability that x
happens times the probability that y
happens. So that's a simple innocuous
looking definition. Let me re phrase it in
a way that it's even more intuitive. So
I'll you check this, it's just a some
trivial algebra. This equation holds, for
the events X and Y, if and only if, this
is just using the definition of
conditional probability we had on the last
slide, if and only if the probability of X
given Y, Is exactly the same thing as the
probability of x. So, intuitively, knowing
that y happens, gives you no information
about the probability that x happens.
That's the sense in which x and y are
independent. And, you should also check
that this holds if and only if, the
probability of y, given x, equals the
probability of y. So, symmetrically,
knowing that X has occurs gives you no
information, no new information about
whether or not Y has occurred. The
probability of Y is unaffected by
conditioning on X. So at this juncture I
feel compelled to issue a warning. Which
is, you may feel like you have a good
grasp of independence. But, in all
likelihood, you do not. For example I
rarely feel confident that I have a keen
grasp on independence. Of course I use it
all the time in my own research and my own
work, but it's a very subtle concept. Your
intuition about independence is very often
wrong, even if you do this for a living. I
know of no other source that's created so
many bugs in proofs by professional
mathematicians and professional computer
science researchers as misunderstandings
of independence and using intuition
instead of the formal definition. So, for
those of you without much practice with
independence, here's my rule of thumb for
whether or not you treat random variables
as independent. If things are independent
by construction, like, for example, you
define it in your algorithm, so the two
different things are independent. Then you
can proceed with the analysis under the
assumption that they're independent. If
there's any doubt, if it's not obvious the
two things are independent, you might want
to, as a rule of thumb, assume that
they're dependent until further notice. So
the slide after next will give you a new
example showing you things which are
independent and things which are not
independent. But before I do that I wanna
talk about independence of random
variables rather than just independence of
events. So you'll recall a random variable
is from the first video on probability
review. It's just a real value function
from the sample space to the real numbers.
So once you know what happens you have
some number. The random variable evaluates
to some real number. Now, what does it
mean for two random variables to be
independent? It means the events of the
two variables taking on any given pair of
values are independent events. So
informally, knowing the value taken on by
one of the random variables tells you
nothing about what value is taken on by
the other random variable. Recalling the
definition of what it means for two events
to be independent, this just means that,
the probability that A takes on value
little a, B takes on value little b. The
probability that both of those happen is
just the product of the probabilities that
each happens individually. So what's
useful about independence of events is
that probabilities just multiply. What's
useful about independence of random
variables is that expectations just
multiply. So, we're going to get an analog
of linear expectation where we can take,
we can interchange an expectation in the
product freely, but I want to emphasize
this, this interchange of the expectation
of the product is valid only for
independent random variables and not in
general, unlike linear expectations. And
we'll see a non example. We'll see how
this fails on the next slide for non
independent random variables. So, I'll
just state it for two random variables,
but the same thing holds by induction for
any number of random variables. If two
random variables are independent, then the
expectation of their product. Equals the
product of their expectations. And again,
do not forget that we need a hypothesis.
Remember, linearity of expectations did
not have a hypothesis for this statement
about products. We do have a hypothesis of
them being independent. So why is this
true? Well, it's just a straight forward
derivation where you follow your nose or
write it out here for completeness, but,
but I really don't think it's that
important. So you start with the
expectation of the product. This is just
the average value of A times B, of course
weighted by the probability of, of any
particular value. So the way we're gonna
group that sum is we're going to sum over
all possible combinations of values, A and
B, that capital A and capital B might take
on, so that's gonna give us a value of A
times B. Times the probability of that big
A takes on the value of little a and
capital B takes on the value of little b.
So that's just by definition where this is
the value of the random variable, capital
A times capital B and this is the
probability that it takes on that value
with the values A and B. Now because A and
B are independent, this probability
factors into the product of the two
probabilities. This would not be true if
they were not independent. It's true
because they're independent. So same sum
where all possible joint values of all A
and B. You still have A times B. But now
we have times the probability that A takes
on the value of A times the probability
that B takes on the value of B. So now we
just need to regroup these terms. So let's
first sum over A. Let's yank out all the
terms that depend on little a. Notice none
of those depend on little b. So we can
yank it out in front of the sum over
little b. So I have an A times the
probability that big A takes on the value
of little a. And then the stuff that we
haven't yanked out is the sum over b, of b
times, little b times the probability that
capital B takes on the value little b. And
what's here inside the quantity? This is
just the definition of the expectation of
b. And then what remains after we have
factored out the expectation of b? Just
this other sum which is the definition of
the expectation of a. So, indeed four
independents random variables, the
expected value of the product is equal to
the product of the expectations. Let's now
wrap up by tying these concepts together
in an example, a simple example that
nevertheless illustrates how it can be
tricky to figure out what's independent
and what's not. So here's the set up.
We're going to consider three random
variables. X1, X2 and X3. X1 and X2 we
choose randomly, so they're equally likely
to be zero or one. But X3 is completely
determined by X1 and X2. So it's gonna be
the XOR of X1 and X2. So XOR stands for
exclusive or. So what that means is that
if both of the operands are zero, or if
both of them are one, then the output is
zero. And if exactly one of them is one,
exactly one of them is zero, then the
output is one. So it's like the logical or
function, except that both of the inputs
are true, then you output false, okay? So
that's exclusive or. Now this is a little
hand wavy, when we start talking about
probabilities, if we want to be honest
about it, we should be explicit about the
sample space. So what I mean by this, is
that X1 and X2 take on all values, they're
equally likely. So we could have a zero,
zero or a one zero or a zero one or a one,
one and in each of these four cases, X3 is
determined by the first two, as the X or,
so you get a zero here, a one here, a one
here and a zero there. And each of these
four outcomes is equally likely. So let me
now give you an example of two random
variables, which are independent, and a
non example. I'll give you two random
variables which are not independent. So
first, I claim that, if you think that X1
and X3, then they're independent random
variables. I'll leave this for you to
check [sound]. This may or may not seem
counter-intuitive to you. Remember X3 is
derived in part from X1. Never the less,
X1 and X3, are indeed independent. And why
is that true? Well, if you innumerate over
the four possible outcomes, you'll notice
that all four possible two byte strings
occur as values for one and three. So here
they're both zero, here they're both one,
here you have a zero and one, and here you
have a one and zero. So you've got all
four of the combinations of probability
one over four. So it's just as if X1 and
X3 were independent fair coin flips. So
that's basically why the claim is true.
Now. That's a perhaps counterintuitive
example of independent random variables.
Let me give you a perhaps counterintuitive
example of dependent random variables.
Needless to say, this example just
scratches the surface and you can find
much more devious examples of both
independent and non-independents if you
look in, say, any good book on discrete
probability. So now let?s consider the
random variable X1 product X3. And X two
and the claim is these are not
independent. So this'll give you a formal
proof for. The way I'm going to prove this
could be slightly sneaky. I'm not going to
go back to the definition. I'm not gonna
contradict the consequence of the
definition. So it's proved that they're
not independent all I need to do, is show
that the product of the expectations is
not the same as the expectations to the
products. Remember if they were
independent, then we would have that
equality. [inaudible] Product of
expectations will equal the expectation to
products. So if that's false than there's
no way these random variables are
independent. So the expectation of the
product of these two random variables is
just the expected value of the product of
all three. And then on the other side, we
look at The product of the expected value
of X1 and X3. And the expected value of
X2. So let's start with the expected value
of X2. That's pretty easy to see. That is
zero half the time and that is one half
the time. So the expected value of X2 is
going to be one-half. How about the
expected value of X1 and X3? Well, from
the first claim, we know that X1 and X3
are independent random variables.
Therefore, the expected value of their
product is just the product of their
expectations. Equal this expectations
equal to the expected value of X1 times
the expected value of X2, excuse me, of
X3. And again, X1 is equally likely to be
zero or one. So its expected value is a
half. X3 is equally likely to be zero or
one so its expected value is a half. So
the product of their expectations is
one-fourth. So the right-hand side here is
one-eighth; one-half times one-fourth, so
that's an eighth. What about the left-hand
side, the expected value of X1 times X3
times X2? Well, let's go back to the
sample space. What is the value of the
product in the first outcome? Zero. What
is the value of the product in the second
outcome? Zero. Third outcome? Zero. Forth
outcome? Zero. The product of all three
random variables is always zero with
probability one. Therefore, the expected
value, of course, is gonna be zero. So
indeed, the expected value of the product
of X1, X3 and X2 zero does not equal to
the product of the corresponding
expectations. So this shows that X1, X3
and X2 are not independent.